[Music]
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson we're shooting today in Italy
in Fiesole town in the hills just above
Florence an academic and author David
Berlinski is a senior fellow at the
discovery Institute's Center for science
and culture and a contributing editor at
inference international review of
science dr. velinski holds a doctorate
in philosophy from Princeton performed
post doctoral work in molecular biology
at Columbia and has taught philosophy
mathematics and English at institutions
such as Stanford Rutgers and the City
University of New York and the
universidad apache his books include the
devil's delusion atheism and its
scientific pretensions and the deniable
darwin and other essays david Berlinski
welcome thank you so much I have to
speak for just a moment about David Cole
earned her the Yale computer scientist
who just this past spring published an
essay in The Claremont Review of Books
called giving up
Darwin quotation there's no reason to
doubt that Darwin successfully explained
the small adjustments by which an
organism adapts to local circumstances
changes to fur density or wing style or
beak shape yet
there are many reasons to doubt whether
he can explain the big picture not the
fine-tuning of species but the emergence
of new ones the Origin of Species is
exactly what Darwin cannot explain close
quote
now David Gallinger is a leading
computer scientist and computer science
is at the very center of everything
that's cool about the new economy about
the current academia it's technocratic
gets rational you don't have to ask
ultimate questions and here's girl
earner going over to the kooky side and
why does he do this in part by reading
the work of David Berlinski
which David gallant nner in his essay
referred to as quote essential
so take me through a few of your
arguments from the deniable darwin
bearing in mind that you have a lot to
answer for
a lot to answer for look since Darwin
published in 1859 everyone has pretty
much recognized what the problem is the
problem is at the end of the inference
we have something we cannot properly
describe a living system how on earth
are we to place our confidence in a
process of evolution if we can
characterize what it reaches it's an
essential problem not only for a dynamic
theory of life but any learning theory
for example if you can't characterize
what an organism has learned you don't
know how to evaluate a learning theory
by the same token what we do know of
living systems is a degree of complexity
that's almost unfathomable its
complexity wrapped up complexity wrapped
up in complexity forming and endless
panorama of labyrinths and we simply
have no way of reconciling the kind of
primitive mechanism we see in a local
variation random mutation and that which
Darwin did describe correctly he was
gone to something there's sort of some
they had a local theory of change but he
had nothing like a global theory and
this is what we're lacking all right let
me ask you if I may David I've made
notes I read the chore that master si
the deniable Darwin and I just made
notes I'm a layman you're a scientist
I'm going to ask you to make me
understand the fossil record this is you
writing in the deniable Darwin quote if
life progressed by an accumulation of
small changes as Darwin suggests the
fossil record should reflect this little
organisms slightly more complicated
slightly more complicated than that and
in a smooth progression to to David
Berlinski and me say or at least to
dinosaurs but before the Canberra
era a brief 600 million years ago
very little is inscribed in the fossil
record and then during this so-called
Cambrian explosion an astonishing number
of biological structures come into
creation all at once the Cambrian era as
I recall lasted 70 million years some
uncertainty about the time it could be
more could be low but the argument is
that in geologic time so that Lincoln
Illinois a blink of an eye
and that's that's not only a problem for
Darwin that's in and of itself fatal
it's not fatal there are a variety of
explanations in the literature I mean
some some paleontologists argue that the
record is there it's just not very
evident others argue that there was a
large scale radiation and much of the
details are now lost but there's no
reason to doubt that that occurred but
the essential part is look you've got a
theory that makes at least one
qualitative prediction that is change in
biology is continuous it's not radical
it's not discontinuous it doesn't jump
and if you look at the historical record
it seems to jump all over the place
especially the Cambrian now whether
there are explanations whether that can
be reconciled the historical record is
an open question but for heaven's sake
let's begin with the obvious there's
something not right in the theory it
makes a qualitative prediction on the
one hand and the facts are recalcitrant
on the other maybe you can reconcile the
two I don't have an opinion I'm not a
palaeontologist
but the least that we should be doing is
saying clearly look something's not
right
something isn't right and it's not only
the Cambrian explosion look at us
sitting around the room doing something
that no other organism can do chatting
with one another now what is it what is
the explanation for a whole suite of
human powers and capacities language
foremost among them the usual Darwinian
explanation the usual explanation of
look it's tremendously useful right
tremendous right okay but so useful why
is it so isolated no other organism can
speak try talking to the dog see how far
it gets you they have nothing to say nor
are the cats
perhaps that's that's incorrect they
don't wish to say yes don't deign to
speak to us yeah but that's a typical
example we have a property that's
absolutely self-evident the power to
assimilate a natural language no other
organism has that power we don't know
why we're the only species so gifted so
is part of your I want to return to the
deniable Darwin in a moment but part of
the part of your argument I'm not even
sure it's an argument as much as
irritation probably better ah lack of
humility within the field you say look
here's what you'd expect from Darwin
continuous change here's the fossil
record they don't match up maybe there
are explanations but for goodness sake
have the humility to say there's a
there's there's there's a problem and
the field doesn't say that well I should
probably be the last person on earth
offering the council of humility my
academic colleagues but I'll do it
anyway yeah that would be a good
beginning listen why don't we go back to
1859 and say here's a theory and have
certain kinds of properties and then
skip forward to the present day and say
look the theory has many interesting
things fidelity the to the facts doesn't
seem to be among them it's an
interesting theory it's no grouse
default in a theory that it's not
faithful to the facts but it's not a
good sign either that includes all the
discussions about gaps in the fossil
record you know when you come to species
they're not many they're form a
continuous progression higher water you
have large groupings that do form
continuous progressions but species
they're very few on the ground does as
Gould recognized right even Jay Gould
recognized
you can't just say the theory is correct
and it's infidelity to the facts is
absolutely of no interest it's very
interesting we don't have a continuous
record maybe there's a good reason maybe
there's a good reason but maybe there's
not all right I sometimes think there's
that there's that there's a urge to
adapt the Burchill bertolt brecht we
have a government legislating a new PA
change the facts change the facts so
here's like back to the deniable dharman
quote according you david the general
issue is one of size and space and the
way in which something small may be
found omits something very big this is
the math of evolution can you explain
that to me you cite you cite an example
of Richard Dawkins who is the pro
ologist I believe and Dawkins says
monkeys typing at typewriters sooner or
later they will type the phrase and he
chooses a phrase from church from
Shakespeare methinks it is a weasel and
then you write methinks it is a weasel
is a six word sentence containing 28
English letters including the spaces it
occupies an isolated point in a space of
ten thousand million million million
million million million possibilities
any definition of natural selection must
plainly meet what I have called a rule
against deferred success all right so
this gets to the mathematics of random
variation acted on under natural
selection
are there enough variations do we have
time for do it are there enough
life-forms mutating is there time has
there been time since Big Bang I suppose
I'm fumbling here but help me to think
about the mathematics everybody's
fumbling the mathematics isn't very
complicated I assure you it's the
implications that are Rabab ative you
take any combinatorial string
look at proteins consists of 20 amino
acids right and you can jumble them up
or permute them in a lot of different
ways and the huge numbers of growing
surprising speed with a surprising speed
if you have a string of amino acids 250
amino acids in length that means you've
got 20 to the 250 as power as your total
space of possibilities now finding
anything in this space is just
impossible you don't have time you don't
have the resources the space is too
overwhelming what you cannot do in
Darwinian theory is say I know what I'm
looking for it happens to be a needle
this is a haystack I know what a needle
looks like it I can go find it yeah you
can do that there's no problem about
that but don't winning in evolution is
blind to the future all success is local
at a particular moment in a particular
space and time if so how is some
complicated protein ever found now I'm
not suggesting for a minute that problem
is negatively overwhelming but it is a
problem exactly like the Cambrian
explosion is a problem this is a problem
- it's called combinatorial explosion
it's called combinatorial explosion
because I coined it thus many years ago
the space becomes huge but exactly the
same thing that's true in a natural
language if you take oh I don't know a
high school graduate is supposed to know
something like 20 thousand words is that
about right maybe half that mean I don't
know her you and I know many more of
course thank you dear and you take a
simple sentence John brought the book
back home and you consider all the
different ways with different nouns and
verbs could slot into that and all the
different ways they could be permuted
how'd you ever find that sentence it is
much worse than finding a needle in a
haystack you found something because you
knew what you were looking for and you
knew what you were looking for because
you had a thought how that thought
translates into a grammatical sentence
knowing those but you did it if you did
it by looking ahead it's very reasonable
to suggest it's not an argument but it's
reasonable to suggest life must have
some forward-looking capacity to
construct the fiercely complicated
structures that we see everywhere like
the human eye like the kidney okay so so
properly understood Darwin is
interesting but the gap between this
very elegant or at least quite simple
everybody can grasp what Darwin is up to
the gap between that and what we
actually see and what we have come to
understand the gap is mathematics
Cambrian explosion and so forth should
instill a greater sense of wonder we
don't know instead of a rather smug
self-confidence that we've got the
problem licked I think that the the
opinion among evolutionary biologists is
not necessarily we have the problem lick
but we have the foundations laid and
everything is everything else is a
matter of embroidering knowledge
foundation I think that's quite mistaken
I see I don't think the foundations are
well laid all right design you quote the
18th century English theologian William
Paley who argued that no one could bring
himself to believe that a watch was
assembled at random much less all of
creation I'm quoting you the deniable
Darwin it is simply a fact that this
courtly and old-fashioned argument is
entirely compelling we we human beings
we never attribute the existence of a
complex artifact to chance close quote
or if I may paraphrase that create
philosopher William Jefferson Clinton if
you see a turtle on a fence post you
know it didn't get there by itself
probably not ok so again why is
this is dangerous territory dangerous
yeah it is dangerous tears come truly
dangerous territory anyway because what
you're saying is life needs some
forward-looking capacity to be able to
find through those extremely complicated
proteins that if something is going on
there that isn't purely random and
anybody who sees David Berlinski tick us
even a half step in that directions is
stop if you takes another two steps will
be back to God the medieval period and
the Inquisition stop him now yeah I
suppose so although I look with
unconcerned that those consequences I
think they're neither here nor there we
should we should have the confidence to
follow a scientific theory wherever it
leads and if it leads back to the
medieval period it leads back to the
13th century that leads finally to the
Inquisition I'm prepared so long as I'm
among the inquisitors but other than
that I think these are misguided
criticisms I don't think the chasm is
going to yarn if we say look we really
don't understand this I don't think
anything bad will happen all right well
let me push back on that there's a essay
an essay that appeared recently National
Review by a biologist called Rajiv Khan
who's you've read this all right you've
you're familiar with that so let me try
a little bit of this sure rajab Khan I
apologize to him if I'm mispronouncing
his name quote evolutionary biology is
nothing for conservatives to fear
because it is one of the crowning
achievements of modern Western
civilization one of the crowning
achievements of Western civilization the
science built upon the rock of Charles
Darwin's ideas is a reflection of
Western modernity 'he's commitment to
truth as a fundamental value
close quote charles darwin was a
champion of truth and david Berlinski is
an obscurantist
I guess the radical loan should give you
a little twinge of doubt crowning
achievement of Western civilization I
don't know Maxwell's theory of the
electromagnetic field for sure
Darwin publishing at the same time an
interesting view not his uniquely and
Alfred Wallace had the same idea but
Alfred Wallace was very significantly
significantly cognizant of the
limitations of those theories Darwin was
none it's influenced let's put it this
way I wouldn't call it a crowning
achievement of Western civilization
because I think the theory is
fundamentally deficient but it certainly
had enormous social influence it's
changed the whole way of thinking what
the for the Goethe or these are other
questions again Rajeev Kahn
today many on the Left reject the very
idea of human nature they assert that
society and values can be restructured
at will you're talking about the social
implications of Darwin so is he that
male and female are categories of the
mind rather than of nature in rejecting
evolution that's me a conservative gives
up the most powerful rejoinder to these
claims men are men and women are women
and if you let go of Darwin you lose
your ability to make that claim it's an
interesting example of a complete non
sequitur but I don't see how a a
rational critique of Dhawan and pedes in
any way the desire to uphold a concept
of human nature not only a concept of
human nature but essential human nature
there is something essential about the
binary divisions in human life between
male and female it's not accidental it
can be changed and deep down we all know
that but that has nothing to do with
Darwin how do you how do you reach the
contrary conclusion by reading the
Origin of Species Darwin himself got rid
of any essential ideas in biology from a
strictly philosophical point of view
he's a nominalist there are no such
things as species abstract entities
there are progression of individuals
receding into the past
there's no point which one can say this
is a species unless you're a group of
isolated individuals and their problems
about that too because that seems to
embrace a species within the folds of
set theory so I mean if you take a look
at the dogs are all dogs if you think
that all dogs form one species can you
say where the species begin and where
you can't say anything like that at all
so the idea of reconciling species to a
modern point of view and set theory is
hopeless well if they're not sets what
are they if dogs don't form a set of
objects what are they either they're
nothing which is Darwin's real position
or there's some abstract planks dead
terminal position because he has no way
of defining the notion of a species
there's nothing essential because
everything is mutable it changes all the
time and he didn't he didn't see that
himself the book is called I'm the
origin of that's an irony but consider
it from a Darwinian point of view an
organism changes and if the changes
accumulate the whole structure of the
species structure changes but there's no
point where you can say that's a species
everything before it's one species
everything after there's another species
is there an primordial dog such that its
birth marks the beginning of the dogs
and everything before that them's just
the wolves no there is no such thing
it's a gradual transition I see I see
okay so you're hadn't every time I talk
to you David there's a new idea that
more or less lifts than my the top of my
head off I'll have to got it I got it
I'll try - all right back to you
throwing me off here David sorry back to
Rajiv Khan one last excerpt from his
recent article a National Review of
quote looking forward the energies of
the right are not most fruitful II spent
on debating descent with modification
and common origin of life you're wasting
your time
the seeds of both tyranny and democracy
were sown by the evolutionary pressures
that shaped humans over millions of
years
we should not pass up knowledge and
insights that might help in preserving
what we think is good beautiful
true close quote be awfully hard to
disagree with that except for the first
part of the seeds of something being so
in an evolutionary time I don't see a
whole lot of seeds being sown in the
struggle for life primordial Africa
certainly not seeds that have anything
to do with modern life that's just one
of the contemporary myths that's bandied
about we're evolutionary evolutionary
psychologists and sociologists keep
talking about the deep aspects of our
nature that were formed by evolutionary
pressures I think most deep aspects of
my nature were not formed by
evolutionary impressions but that that's
a separate argument but the the
succeeding part of that quotation yeah
sure we can judge things by standards of
truth goodness and beauty nobody's
stopping us David
you recently in in in inference the
International review of science which
you helped to edit you published a
review of something that somebody worked
very hard at and was it was a clear
effort to achieve something good and
that object was a book called blueprint
and it is a book by the Yale sociologist
and physician Nicholas Christakis whose
name I may be mispronouncing but I tried
hard to get it right Nicholas Christakis
and the name the name of the book is
blueprint and Christakis says we live at
a difficult moment Europe is in turmoil
more turmoil coming immigration
pressures rise of China tensions between
China and the United States and it is in
the air that we are predisposed toward
violence and disorder because of
evolutionary pressures but let me
Nicholas Christakis produce a book
showing the way that we are predisposed
to cooperate to form groups to work for
the good as well by evolution the book
runs to more than 500 pages but the
argument in brief and I quoted from blue
natural selection has shaped our lives
as social animals you should be happy
about this
priming arpa capacity for love
friendship cooperation learning and even
our ability to recognize the uniqueness
of other individuals all this from
natural selection we each carry within
us an evolutionary blueprint for making
a good society close quote and I have to
tell you that the tenor of your review
is one in which you are just not
impressed why is that well divide
through those statements by natural
selection you're left with rather an
optimistic credo
we are by and large disposed to certain
worthwhile ends and we have the means to
pursue them yeah that's true sometimes
the negation is just as true if you look
at the 20th century and all the virtues
that he expresses for example
cooperation can be put to very nefarious
uses look the Nazi Party was a marvelous
engine of cooperation all those Nazis
cooperated with one another running
death camps cooperation is relatively
neutral the gulag couldn't have been
maintained without without cooperation
either China couldn't be maintained
under under Mao in the 60 50s and 60s
without large-scale cooperation this
hasn't passed the level of the bromide
something one swallows and expects some
relief for heartburn the heartburn goes
far too deep for this kind of analysis
the heartburn of the 20th century and
I'm not talking about indigestion either
I'm talking about heartburn and we have
very little by way of understanding what
happened in the 20th century look we're
talking about 220 million excess deaths
between 1914 and 1945 that's not
something that can be relieved by
calling to mind our powers of
cooperation if anything there was far
too much cooperation during those years
a little love far too much cooperation
so these these offer little by way
either of analysis penetrating analysis
of the sought for example that had an
errand
although an errand and banality of evil
and well and the sources of
totalitarianism all of her books at Rice
she recognized the magnitude of the
question that needed to be answered
which was why after the relatively
optimistic 19th century was there a
descent into barbarism and the 20th
century we don't know and Charles Darwin
doesn't help us answer it doesn't help
much by the way the technique of
argument that in blueprint you write
this the argument that is Christakis is
argument and blueprint the argument is
unvarying and proceeds from the common
feature of social life to the gene
acting as its presumptive cause yet we
can complete no connection between any
particular gene and any phenotypic trait
it's true isn't it by a connection I
mean a complete causal connection and it
is remote in time the time at which we
were able to complete a chemical or a
biochemical connection you have no idea
what takes place I mean you learn to
walk I learned to walk you can say
there's a gene for walking because we
didn't learn it but that doesn't tell
you any more than that you learnt to
walk David in your review of blueprint a
book by Christie aqus you sum up your
own view by writing this if the
blueprint for our social behavior
circumscribes the terrible societies of
the 20th century it's too broad to be of
interest and if it is determined by the
human genome it's too narrow to be of
hope we must look to other sources for
our common humanity which led me to
wonder what would David make of a
certain document that I find compelling
but difficult and that is the address on
the relation between faith and reason of
then Pope Benedict the 16th at 2006
at his old University of Regensburg
Germany and I have no idea I'm doing
this because we're friends and because I
genuinely want to hear what you have to
make of this what you make of this so
and I may have to read a couple of
longest passages to set it up the pope
sets up the problem here's the problem
part one Western thought has reached a
point at which quote only the kind of
certainty resulting from the interplay
of mathematical and empirical elements
can be considered scientific by its very
nature this method that is the
scientific method is currently
understood in the West by its very
nature this method excludes the question
of God making it of making that question
appear unscientific or pre scientific
close quote and you come out of your
chair and say of course it excludes the
question of God God has nothing to do
with science or is that not quite your
response maybe it should be well I do
think is that if you look at the great
theories in physics that's really where
the richest tradition lies that has some
relevance to the world as it is as
opposed to mathematics not physics
explaining observed reality well real
physics explaining the world alright
mathematics explains plenty of things
but I think that should be put aside as
a separate case for the time being but
neither the assumptions nor the
conclusions of any of the great four
physical theories Newtonian mechanics
Einstein relativity quantum mechanics
quantum field theory make any claims
about the existence of God they just
don't do it out just leave it out that's
either a good thing or bad thing but the
fact is incontrovertible these are not
theological documents fine treat them
for what they are they're physical
theories but don't argue as so many
people do that their implicit conclusion
is anti theistic it's not there's no
conclusion you can draw from special
relativity that would indicate
God does not exist or that he does okay
fair enough and I'm I'm even following
you I believe the problem part two the
pressure on Europe from the Islamic
world again I'm quoting benedict xvi the
world's profoundly religious cultures
see the exclusion of the divine from the
universality of reason that is we can
talk about anything but not God as an
attack on their most profound
convictions a reason which is deaf to
the divine and which relegates religion
to the realm of subcultures that's what
you were saying what you were describing
this notion of physics as disproving God
or in one way or another condescending
to the religious that relegate SRI
illegitimate of subcultures is incapable
of entering into the dialogue of
cultures
close quote we have a problem we
Westerners have shoved any notion of
religious thought any sense of the
transcendent off to the children's table
and other cultures and in particular was
Islam from which the West is under
pressure aside from anything else just
look at the population figures the
population of Europe over the next
half-century will decline the population
of the Islamic world will grow by some
hundreds of millions that's that's a
problem and we can't talk to them let
alone sorting out some kind of working
room we can't talk to them because they
take religion seriously you admit that
he's framed a real problem admit at
Grant u degree how would you see the
problem you're not so you're not
impressed
I wouldn't express the problem in the
way that he did I think were perfectly
capable of discussing things with Islam
we're less capable of entertaining a
whole category of arguments that we used
to entertain with considerable interest
that is theological argument right and
theology has more or less disappeared as
part of the Western curricula
part of the Western habit of thought but
it has not completely disappeared look
why has it just stopped there why has it
disappeared and you're talking about
whatever a century and a half two
centuries what are you talking about
since the French Revolution years maybe
since the French Revolution because of
the first of all that there are two
parts to the disappearance the enormous
success of a secular culture very
obviously breeds an expectation that its
fundamental assumptions must be correct
if it produced so much material
abundance so much relative absence of
scarcity and the second part is the
great difficulty of entertaining very
abstract arguments about the existence
and Providence of God in the world as it
is without the apparatus of modern
science to buttress those arguments that
is we feel a distinct inadequacy in
making any claims about the real world
without having an enormous apparatus
like a backpack saying I'll look in the
backpack and special relativity tells me
that the ontological proof is correct
well no it's not going to tell you that
you have to address it on its own and
naked and that's something very few
people want to do anymore
it is temporary it's just a fashion
theological arguments are not going to
disappear and the fundamental questions
they address are not going to disappear
either you see certain signs of the wind
for example the ontological argument and
philosophy which has been current since
the 12th in fact the late 11th century
has not disappeared and the greatest
logician of the 20th century curt girdle
made it manifest in his own way he looks
to explain that the girdle the girdle
insufficient what is it called it I've
never understood it Anselm argue within
the 11th 12th century that God is a
being greater than which none other can
be conceived and he concluded therefore
he must he must exist
well why because if he didn't exist you
conceive something still greater namely
a being who
exist oh well everybody said you know I
couldn't be right oh my god what was he
the trouble is it's very hard to refute
it's very it's devilishly difficult to
really come up with a convincing
explanation of where he went wrong and
in the 1960s Kurt girdle worked it all
out in terms of modal logic any people I
don't think he published Israel he
showed his results - Dana Scott among
others and it's provoked an enduring
controversy ever since then an
indication in a small subfield that
these issues retain an intellectual
vitality denied them by mainstream
science does this mean the argument is
correct I have no idea you have no idea
but it's but the argument from design is
also making a reappearance it's also
making European inconclusively granted
but it hasn't gone away and it won't go
away because we're too impressed by the
facts to avoid or an encounter with any
theory that seems to explain them that's
that action so Newton Einstein Max
Planck the physical theories they come
up with you don't find something you
don't have a feeling that there's
something else trying to push push into
it but when you discuss is you have just
discussed evolution and you say wait a
minute what could possibly account for
the complexity of life wait a minute
even grant that these mean that life
proceeds by way of mutation it doesn't
look as though can be entirely random it
looks as though it knows where it wants
to go you feel as though just on the
other side of the wall there must be
something there that's an intelligent
that's there's a beat there's something
there you don't feel that in physics do
you and that argument from design is
look at this it must mean something what
you study what you do know I think so
you look at physics long enough and the
murmur becomes quite insistent why are
the laws of nature the way they are why
are the constants the parameters fixed
for the values that they happen to have
these may be bad questions they may be
good questions they may be unanswerable
or undecidable questions but they are
questions they are questions and the
insistent murmur is heard whenever you
push a discipline to a certain degree
and with a certain effort of the will so
that wasn't Einstein Einstein's comments
we have a few comments in which he
mentions God there's certain theories of
which he'd approved disapproved because
God wouldn't play dice with the universe
the old one doesn't throw dice the old
one doesn't throw dice Delta but that he
wasn't just being coy he felt he felt it
don't know Einstein was given over to
expressing a lot of app offense pithy
thought all right we shouldn't make his
comments about God not playing dice were
really a response to his discomfort with
quantum theory all right but it was a
fundamental attitude toward the universe
as well because Einstein believed in the
rationality the comprehensive bility of
the universe okay stop there because now
let me get you back to Benedict you just
said the rationality of the universe and
Benedict in this speech at Regensburg he
quotes a medieval Byzantine Emperor who
is and there's a dialogue we have a
dialogue between the Byzantine Emperor
and his Islamic captors he'd been
captured and the Islam on well ii it
doesn't matter but he makes the argument
you must not attempt to convert by
violence by conquest because that's an
act against reason an unreasoning it's
the nature of god which is reasonable
and then the pope and that's in fourteen
hundred and something or others i recall
and here's what the what benedict xvi
says in two thousand six is the
conviction that acting unreasonably
contradicts god's nature
merely a greek idea something that
occurred in Byzantine culture or is it
always and in print
Stickley true and then he gives a little
exegesis modifying the first book of
Genesis the first verse of the whole
Bible John Gospel John begins the
prologue of his gospel with the words in
the beginning was the logos and logos of
course means reason and word it's the
very idea that the Greeks Hellenistic
thought places at the center of its
conception of reason and John the spoke
the final word on the biblical concept
of God and in his word all the often
toilsome and torturous threads of
biblical faith find their culmination
and synthesis so in the distinctively
Western judeo-christian tradition I
suppose one thing I'm asking is whether
that tradition still lives still informs
it still should inform us there is no
necessary contradiction between faith
and reason when Richard Dawkins the
zoologist says Darwin makes it possible
to be an intellectually fulfilled
atheist he's talking nonsense this is
not easy for you we don't like this you
don't like this line of thought well
intellectually fulfilled atheist how
full should an intellectually fulfilled
atheist really be must he have answers
to all the questions that human beings
have asked since time immemorial or is
it sufficient that he just dismisses a
great many questions and reposes and
tranquility thereafter I think Dawkins
really means the latter it gives us
freedom to ignore a lot of questions and
I suppose that's true it's true
empirically but the questions returned
returned the murmurs always heard if you
listen carefully enough the interesting
question is whether the interesting
question theologically is whether
rationality is an essential attribute of
the deity and bear in mind the Islamic
tradition says no right no yes and that
is a deep
found difference you only have to talk
to a Muslim theologian for five minutes
to realize how deep that runs God is
limited by nothing including the powers
of reason and this drove a great many
medieval Muslim theologians men
al-ghazali's for example he couldn't
reconcile that view of the deity with
anything to which he was committed in
virtue of his training in Greek logic
for example so he simply stopped talking
stopped writing as his physician said
very memorably God put a lock on his
tongue and that's the only way he could
reconcile these quite different impulses
let me finish up Benedict and and
Regensburg I'm having a lovely time just
tossing these things that she was seeing
what you do with them this is the Pope
he's something I've had this attempt
meaning his argument painted with broad
strokes at a critique of modern reason
strictly empirical scientific method
from within has nothing to do with
putting the clock back to the time
before the Enlightenment and rejecting
the insights of the modern age yet while
we rejoice in the new possibility
science has opened the material the
material wealth we all did this the
sheer success of empirical science in
producing new wealth for society right
we all rejoice in that we also see
dangers and we must ask ourselves how we
can overcome them the enemy of modern
life the end of all right we will
succeed in doing so only if reason and
faith can come together in a new way
does David Berlinski buy this in this
sense theology rightly belongs within
the wide-ranging dialogue of the
sciences precisely as theology as an
inquiry into the rationality of faith
only thus do we become capable of
genuine dialogue of cultures and
religions so urgently needed today faith
and reason not only is there no
necessary contradiction but we ought to
recognize and in some way celebrate and
in some way make use of the way in which
the tradition we have inherited the
judeo-christian tradition
sees them as linked well you've got a
synthesis between two and pound rubles I
really don't know what what commitment
is made when I I say or somebody else
says I have faith I have faith in a
great many things I use that elocution
for example I have faith that tomorrow
morning the Sun will rise or faith that
yesterday the Sun did rise
I believe in reason to the extent that I
understand what people are talking about
when they and I believe in logic let's
put it that way I know what a good
argument is what a bad argument what
soundness is what validity is beyond
that reason seems to have very little
meaning for me so a reconciliation
between two and ponderable seems to be
like the meanest sort of kisses sold
under famine conditions yeah that's what
they are the reconciliation is what it
is but it doesn't really mean anything
one thing I'm reasonably certain of is
that theology as a discipline is not
going to undergo a resurrection anytime
soon it's not no I don't believe it's
not interesting enough why would that be
there's a tremendous tremendous
buffeting that ideas undergo and the
closest we can come to explaining them
is to say that they're buffeted by taste
by by changes in what we consider
important I mean everybody who dismisses
theology as a moribund science for
example Richard Dawkins you can be sure
they're not studying it they just know
the outlines devoted to an examination
of the property it couldn't be any it
couldn't be anything that occupies an
evolutionary biologist and that's true
it's not anything that occupies an
evolutionary biologist without a
dedicated audience the subject will
perish and that's what's happened over
the last 200 years it still exists in
terms of Catholic hermeneutics it exists
in terms of different different
varieties of Catholic Jewish or Islamic
doctrine
but it's not at the mainstream and it's
not going to move to the mainstream and
that's just a fact we have to accept
last questions Europe you lived here for
a couple of decades now below
replacement level birth rates economic
stagnation relative to the United States
relative to China certainly uncertainty
about the continued role or even over
the long term existence of the historic
nation-states and under immense pressure
from Africa population of Europe flat
declining population of Africa is
expected to double by 2050 two
generations from now it will have
doubled and Europe will have begun a
hollowing out on the one hand you've got
Emanuel Mack hall president of France
Angela Merkel Chancellor of Germany who
insist on a thoroughly secular Europe on
the other hand one last time Benedict
the 16th this convergence of biblical
faith and Greek philosophy with the
subsequent addition of the Roman
heritage created Europe and remains the
foundation of what rightly can be called
Europe close quote
how does Europe survive must there be
some kind of conscious return to the
judeo-christian tradition are the
secularists lazy day and France is that
the way to go what what I certainly try
not to think in terms of two generations
into the future because it's just too
long a period I can hardly hardly make
sense of what's going to happen next
week because the there's so many
surprises I never expected the Mac home
presidency to be jeopardized by the
Shillito movement but guys with the
yellow vests but it was I didn't expect
Merkel to have emerged from her welcome
in 2015 politically handicapped but she
was she and may have done the right
thing moral he should do the wrong thing
politi welcome she welcomed million
about a million immigrants into Germany
she welcomed a million largely Syrian I
think in
Vincente to germany and she was warmly
applauded by correct opinion everywhere
and i think the moral gesture was
reasonable considering germany is
Germany unexpected but reasonable but
politically it was a fatal a fatal
mistake she didn't have jeopardized her
power completely and that's why she's on
the way out right now what very very
often goes unnoticed is that socially
the assimilation of a million refugees
seems to have passed relatively
successfully the small rate arise in the
crime rate here and there but by and
large the anarchy and the chaos that was
predicted has not taken place that
Germans seemed to be very capable of
doing that sort of thing what the the
role of the nation-state is that remains
fraud the fact of the matter is nobody
believes in the nation-state either not
it's really gone it's gone not in Italy
not in France there are vestiges of
patriotism everyone is emotionally you
without a little Britain I would include
Britain you would include that would
include the nation-state is an idea and
no longer has an overwhelming hold on
man's imagination so brexit was a waste
of time
brexit was a complicated decision where
people just said they were fed up with
the British elites and there there are
loss of sovereignty to the EU and they
were absolutely right there was a
considerable loss of sovereignty you and
the best proof is that it's so hard to
get out of the EU but whether that is an
exaltation of British identity I really
doubt it the today's a contemporary
Britain is incapable emotionally
incapable of doing what it did in 1940
that is rallying to a superb leader in
France ooh the idea of France is
cultural now it's a matter of taste
savoir faire but it's not a matter of
Mendes sense of French identity nor the
Italian nor the five years fifty years
ago when de Gaulle spoke about let go I
happened to laugh cause people somehow
or other had some notion what he meant
they don't today gone gone in half a
century simply even that
it's just not in French sense of self it
can be said under on eclis today it
cannot be said cannot be said without
irony so so you're an optimist or a
pessimist or you just don't you're just
perfectly content leading one day little
taking it one day at a time in Paris I
think it's foolish to be an optimist or
a pessimist there are plenty of reasons
for both for optimism
the remarkable improvement in the
physical circumstances of life
throughout Europe United States Japan
even China burgeoning middle class
probably also the Soviet Union to some
extent in Africa to some extent Latin
America is a case apart those are all
good reasons for optimism the decline in
poverty improvement in health very solid
reasons for optimism but there are also
reasons for pessimism the chief among
them is just look back at the 20th
century and see what can happen David
last couple of questions in April 15 the
Cathedral of Notre Dame consumed in
flames that evening your daughter Claire
a very fine writer in her own right by
the way your daughter Claire puts up
this post my father is safe but he's
been evacuated so he's sleeping on my
bed it's 20 years he said look that I've
been looking out on Notre Dame that
building is completely part of my life
and then he fell asleep
the French have announced an
international competition to redesign
the roof and spire of Notre Dame French
Prime Minister Philippe the competition
will give the building quote aspire
suited to the techniques and challenges
of our time cross forbid I was the
kassay what God took respect what do you
expect yourself to be looking out on for
the next 20 years some architectural
monstrosity without doubt I mean modern
architecture is a spasm in ugliness
almost everywhere that you look and
these people's incompetence are exceeded
only by their vanity we all know that
every time a modern
building goes up everyone wants to spit
at it and if they lose the desire to
spit at it it's only because they've
become familiar with it like the pyramid
in front of the Louvre I don't know
whether you've seen any of the proposals
for the roof of Notre Dom one
enterprising architect suggested a
swimming pool an Olympic sized swimming
pool on top of a an 800 year old
religious structure gives you an idea of
what they have in mind
all right on that point you're not
optimistic your parents fled Europe for
the United States you move back
I checked the population statistics
France has a population of about half a
million Jews and a population of between
five and six million Muslims do you feel
safe completely so no problem me
personally yes you know I've been dating
a Muslim woman for 20 years unprotected
I've got an appetizer right here so so
you're telling me calm down this notion
I've been trying to say Europe is under
pressure okay and one thing we read in
the United States often is that Jewish
populations in France particularly are
under pressure there are places you
don't feel safe on the street one
doesn't feel safe on the street and so
you nurses there are yeah I mean look
there are higher crime neighborhoods and
lower crime neighborhoods I can tell you
it as far as I'm concerned as far as
Claire is concerned we don't feel under
pressure from anti-semitism although we
know perfectly well where the
anti-semitism comes from I mean there's
a great deal of Islamic anti-semitism
but it's fragile it's very thin it's not
anything like historical anti-semitism
it's the narcissism of small differences
because anyone who knows the Muslim
community especially the Muslim family
knows they're mirror images of the
Jewish community they really are very
close a last passage this is the last
question last passage from your essay
the deniable Darwin and you're
discussing the second law this is this
was fascinating I've not seen this
anywhere else in the writing about
Darwin probe for or against the second
law of thermodynamics
which of course holds that any in any
system entropy will tend to increase
never decrease entropy meaning disorder
just disorder right so this is what you
write quite life life appears to offer
at least a temporary rebuke to the
second law of thermodynamics
if the complexity of living creatures is
increasing the entropy that surrounds
them is decreasing I thought to myself I
had never thought of that as a
definition of life but of course we
inhale air we consume food and look
we're ordered creatures whatever the
universe as a whole may be doing and I'm
old enough to have been taught that the
universe is running down like a clock
biologically things have gone from bad
to better how so
you continue God said let the waters
swarm with swarms of living creatures
and let fowl fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven that is how so
and who on the basis of experience would
be inclined to disagree
close quote now David it's been a long
time since you and I addressed this
question but are you still passing
yourself off as an agnostic night and
day I'm not going to you were cutting
the lice for me on that one whatsoever
look there's a crucial difference to be
made a man men says I believe that God
does not exist which Dawkins or Sam
Harris or Christopher Hitchens that's an
affirmation he's making a commitment to
a certain kind of cradle system I
believe that just as I believe there's
no natural number between four and five
I think I can show that very easily a
man who says I don't believe that God
exists has no skin in the game he's just
saying that
among his beliefs are not one that could
be expressed as God exists doesn't mean
he believes the contrary it means he has
not reached that state
equipoise where he can say God exists I
believe that God exists he's withdrawing
his belief and that is something that is
incontestable you can't argue against a
man who says I just don't believe it it
doesn't mean he he needs persuasion or
he needs proof that in in the economy of
his belief system you won't find a
particular belief I think before one
crosses the threshold of theological
commitment one has to be put together in
a certain way Pascal said very memorably
every human being has a hole in his
heart that's shaped like God well maybe
but in some men the hole is a whole lot
smaller than others I don't say this is
a good thing or a bad thing but I am
mindful of the smallness in diameter of
the hole I possess and there's just
nothing I wish to change about that
that's the way it is there you know
David Berlinski author of many works
including the deniable Darwin and other
essays and editor of inference
International Journal of science thank
you my pleasure thank you for having me
for uncommon knowledge the Hoover
Institution and Fox Nation I'm Peter
Robinson
[Music]
you